I am indeed delighted to be here with the Future of India on this Children's Day, 14th November, 2002. My greetings to the children, teachers and members of Industrial community particularly members of CII who have organized this event and to release this vision document "Developed India : Mission for the Young". I am happy to inform you that today I have completed my mission of interacting with 100,000 school children across the length and breadth of the nation. Wherever I went, be it Arunachal Pradesh, Nagaland, Madhya Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka or any other part of India, the voice of the youth is unique and strong in articulating their vision and dream. Everyone dreams of living in a prosperous India, a happy India and a peaceful India. The combination of prosperity, happiness and peace to a nation always come together. When all three of them converge on to India, then India truly be a Developed Nation. Today I am going to talk to you about how India can be transformed into a Developed Nation. There are more than 300 million children of your age group in India. There are about 2000 children in this hall. What can this smaller fraction do to realize the dream of Developed India.

Even though you are only a very small speck of ocean, of the 300 million children on whose shoulders the future of India rests, you can ignite the minds, light the fire, become a burning candle to light another candle. My dear children, you work in the school for about 25000 hours before you complete 12th std. Within the school curriculum / school hours, I want you to contribute to the Mission of Developed India by involving in the student centric activities like Literacy Development, Eco-Care Movement.

India after its independence was determined to move ahead with planned policies for Science & Technology. Now, India is very near to self-sufficiency in food, making the ship to mouth existence of 1950s, an event of the past. Also improvements in the health sector, have eliminated few contagious diseases. There is a increase in life expectancy. Small scale industries provide high percentage of National GDP - a vast change in 1990s compared to 1950s. Today India can design, develop and launch world class geo-stationary and sun synchronous, remote sensing satellites.

The nuclear establishments have reached the capability of building nuclear power stations, nuclear medicine and nuclear irradiation of agricultural seeds for growth in agricultural production. Today India has become a Nuclear Weapon State. Defence Research had led to design, development and production of Main Battle Tanks, strategic missile systems, electronic warfare systems and various armours. India is a missile power. Also we have seen growth in the Information Technology; the country is progressing in hardware and software export business of more than 10 billion dollars even though there are low ebbs in the last few years. India yet is a developing country. What Technology can do further?

Technology has multiple dimensions. Geopolitics convert the technology to a particular nation's policy. The same policy will lead to economic prosperity and capability for national security. For example, the developments in chemical engineering brought fertilizers for higher yield of crops while the same science led to chemical weapons. Likewise, rocket technology developed for atmospheric research helped in launching satellites for remote sensing and communication applications which are vital for the economic development. The same technology led to development of missiles with specific defense needs that provides security for the nation. The aviation technology development has led to fighter and bomber aircraft, and the same technology will lead to passenger jet and also help operations requiring quick reach of support to people affected by disasters. At this stage, let us study global growth of technology and impact in human life.